---
title: "Queer"
date: 2022-10-02T20:19:27+01:00
draft: false
tags: [""]
---

Queer is a loaded word that will have a different, but clear first assumption to people who see it in isolation. You may think of a queer friend of yours, you may think of pride parades, you may think of queer culture staples such as Drag Race or queer musical artists. It's a word that's intentionally vague yet simultaneously extremely powerful and loaded.

If you're reading this as someone who knows me personally, you may or may not associate me with the word depending on what we often talk about. But I think it's a safe assumption to say that if you know me in real life, you don't associate me with the word especially strongly, and I don't especially blame you. My journey of self-exploration and extracting some sort of self-identity out of an introverted, obsessive mind in a school and area so lacking in cultural and ethnic diversity meant that I didn't find myself for many years after you found me.

The journey in this instance doesn't especially matter, as I ultimately want to want to talk about where I am now. I'm queer. As I said at the start, this is a word that is intentionally vague so I have to be more specific. I am non-binary and not straight.

To be non-binary is as vague of a phrase as 'queer' in many ways. Many people see the gender spectrum as Male on one side, Female on the other side and non-binary in the middle. This is incorrect. If you were to visualise it, it would be two dots for each of the binary genders, and the infinite whitespace around them would be non-binary. To me, identifying as non-binary means that I am free of traits and ideals placed on me through my assigned gender at birth. This does not mean I owe you androgyny in order for you to respect and remember this.

As freeing as being non-binary is, it also has resulted in a horrific, soul-destroying entity entering my life - misgendering. Misgendering and using the wrong pronouns isn't some unimportant shit to laugh at in a stupid "SJW owned" compilation, it is something that eats away my happiness and sense of self-worth. People who identify with their assigned gender at birth trying to relate to being non-binary is something that isn't helpful when it comes to this topic, as ultimately you are seen by most of the population as that without you having to constantly correct people and feel like you're ruining the vibe by asking for simple respect. Someone calling me by he/him pronouns consistently or meeting someone for the first time and knowing they see me as male destroys me. It brings down my sense of self. The lens in which I understand myself immediately becomes shattered. Explaining dysphoria and misgendering is something I cannot put into words. It's an unexplainably soul-tearing feeling that I experience almost daily.

So, how can people avoid this/help? This is a difficult, nuanced topic and one where it's easy to get into gender theory and stuff, but ultimately if you're reading this article you can probably tell that isn't quite the vibe I set out to make when writing it. Ultimately, all I ask on a personal level is - please take caution when referring to me. Correct yourself when you use he/him pronouns, don't call me part of "the boys", don't assume traits of me that stem from my assigned gender of birth, correct other people when they use the wrong pronouns. The last one is perhaps the most difficult and demanding ask, but ultimately a "oh hey, yeah they actually use they/them" is genuinely really appreciated. Ultimately my ask comes down to - I'm not a man, don't see or refer to me as one. An ocassional slip-up is totally understandable especially if you've known me for years, but persistently messing up I'm less keen on.
