---
title: "KISS: The Introduction"
date: 2022-08-10T13:51:03+01:00
draft: false 
tags: ["music", "kiss"]
---

I have recently been binging the XFM/Radio X back catalogue of Elis James & John Robins, after retro-oneing the whole of the 5 Live show and How Do You Cope. The duo's love of music has never been a secret on the 5 Live show (hell, the "theme song" of the show is Peaches En Regalia by Frank Zappa), but on their original commercial digital indie radio station, they get the opportunity to talk about music a hell of a lot more, leading them to have a podcast-only feature "The Keep It Session Sessions".

This feature not only informs them of an important life mantra in its title, but also informs the listener of music Elis and John like by recommending a song or artist (or maybe even album, I have to admit I have only just gotten into the KISS era of the podcast), taking it in turns. After listening to a couple of episodes of the KISS era Elis & John Show, I decided that it is only right for me to take their recommendations and catalogue my experiences with them. I'll take it a step further by listening to the entire album a song is on that is recommended, or if it's an artist I will listen to their most acclaimed/interesting work.

According to XFM-era Elis and John bible "The Vibe Guide", there are 163 episodes in which a KISS section is included. Although I could easily power through this many episodes of the show in a couple of months, I will try and hold back slightly and keep up as much as I can to maintain this slightly strange devotion to the show.

From Gorky's Zygotic Mynci, to Bonnie Prince Billy, to Neutral Milk Hotel, I will summarise Elis/John's description of their recommendation, and my experience with it. For artists I already know well, I will write about how much I vibe with their analysis and visit their work under a new lens, and for completely new experiences (most of them) I will do the same but with severely less gravitas.

Thanks for reading, and Keep It Session™.