---
title: "State of Digital Music Playback"
date: 2022-07-21T20:08:06+01:00
draft: false
tags: ["music"]
---

Digital music (by which I mean playing music on computers (by which I mean playing music on personal devices such as a phone or PC)) has been commonplace for only roughly 2 decades, but has seen huge change in that time. From peer to peer piracy and ripping CDs, to the beautiful era of the MP3 blog, to music streaming. 

We're firmly in the age of "yeah I like music, what's your Spotify?", and never one to be happy with literally anything, I dislike it. Yes you can access any (read as, a large portion of) song from any (read previous subordinate clause) artist, but who does that benefit? The consumer lacks any connection to the music they listen to due to lost physicality or feeling of owning a song or album, and the artist earns enough to pay for their car insurance for the year and not much else (unless you're a real big hitter).

So, what's the solution? It's hard to tell. To many youths, having a CD or record collection alongside streaming is a good best of both worlds - you get to pay for your favourite music, therefore lining the pockets of artists (let's not think about the cut given to labels, unless you're cool and buy self-published stuff or support genuinely good labels) while having the convenience of sharing an account between all your devices with any song you possibly want (read last paragraph's major caveat-based subordinate clause). But I'm not happy with that, because I'm not happy with anything. But I also do have a genuine complaint with the meshing of buying and streaming music - fragmentation.

I hate unnecessary fragmentation. I say this as a Linux desktop user, bear in mind, which has fragmentation up the wazoo, but I see that as having genuine justification and is good for enthusiast end-users as we have a lot of choice. Having to remember where you listened to Yaeji's latest release, whether you downloaded it on Soulseek out of laziness, added it to your Apple Music library or have it on your Bandcamp account, or maybe a mix of all 3 if you first pirated it, then bought it, then continued to stream out of laziness... yeah you can see my personal distaste towards being an enthusiastic music-buyer while also streaming. It's genuinely annoying forgetting something buried deep in your Bandcamp account that is an amazing release because you keep using Apple Music, and it's something I dealt with for years. So, early this year I decided to say "fuck it" (not literally, I live alone and so this would be insane) to music streaming and live off my physical collection and a unified digital collection consisting of pirated and legally bought material. Long-term, this means I know exactly where everything is, and I even tag things based on those files' sources. This isn't perfect.

There has never been a more universally friendly interface to a digital music collection than iTunes. Buy in the iTunes store, you see it in your collection, you download it, but you can also import your own MP3s. Although lacking support for lossless, this was a basically perfect solution for millions of people and is a large reason why digital music took off so much. There has never since been a better, or even close to anywhere near as good all-in-one solution to having your digital collection all in one place, with a marketplace, with ability to sync to your devices. Sure, MusicBee and the like are better for nerds like me but even then, it kind of... lacks something? It feels so utilitarian that it lacks charm, and I've never used a music program that didn't mean I had to do something that I wasn't quite a fan of. 

The case is even worse on Linux. There are a trillion music playback programs for GTK, Qt and otherwise, but only one I regard as somewhat usable for my use-case. You see, I like to divide my collection into things I have listened to, and things I haven't. This means that if I want to dig into something I haven't listened to, I have a proper interface of everything I need to listen to, and if I just wanna relax and listen to some music, I don't have hundreds of albums staring at me I have no interest in listening to at that moment. Only one program on Linux natively gives me that experience, Tauon Music Box. As a result, it has been my go-to for a couple of years now, but it feels like I'm using it in ways it wasn't intended for sometimes, and its interface isn't quite... me enough (isn't enough like iTunes). All other music players on Linux are either far too barebones, some embarassingly so, or just lack a feature or two I need, almost always the ability to have multiple libraries and a UI to switch between them, or the proper ability to filter through a single library in a nice format. God I'm a fun person.

This all sounds like it doesn't matter at all. But it does, because making music a chore is what I've tried to escape from for years. I made music a chore a few years ago by obsessively rating everything based on first listen and not revisiting albums enough, resulting in literal months between listening to any music at times, and now I adore listening to music again I feel like any interface towards my collection is a chore, and that maintaining this collection is a chore. For all the annoyances with streaming music, I sure as hell listen to a lot more music when I have a subscription to a streaming service.

So yeah, that's the state of digital music playback. Great if you're not a nerdy cunt, not great for me.